## a4-spotifyanalyze

# Introduction
Spotify is one of the biggest music streaming services used in the United States, and one of the side effects of that is that they're at the forefront of guiding what kind of music we listen to. What gets recommended to an individual user is largely impacted by what genres they like. But, with over 5,000 distinct genres on Spotify, what do genres even mean and how do they group together our favorite kinds of music? We explored what a genre really is by visualizing attributes of 100 songs from 6 different genres to look for patterns. 

# Rationale and Iteration
When we first explored the audio data for the genres we selected, we identified eleven audio attributes that we could potentially visualize and then narrowed our selection down to six features that we thought would give viewers more insight into audio differences by genre. We wanted to enable viewers to compare the selected genres using all six audio attributes in a single visualization instead of creating a separate bar chart or other graph per attribute. 

The list of possible genres were put prominently on the top to signal its selection’s importance to the whole visualization.  We designed this as tabs that can be easily selected and deselected to lower the barrier of interaction, in hopes that users can easily choose the genres as well as deciding the size of visual load they prefer (many genres selected vs few selected). The tab also serves the additional function of legends. We have given extensive thought to the color scheme.  We originally thought of using colors that connote certain music genres. For example black for classical (as black is seen as a “classic” color) and brass for jazz (since jazz instruments like saxophone are brass colored). But iterations of such color schemes all suffer from the problems of not overlaying well, or colors not being easily distinguished from one another. We ultimately picked the Tableau color scheme as we perceive its colors to be the most distinct from one another as well as discernible even when overlayed. 

Upon opening the visualization for the first time, the viewer can see that the preselected genres for comparison are pop and classical, and energy is the preselected attribute for in-depth exploration. Clicking on the attribute axis labels changes the selected attribute to explore in the right panel. In the radial chart, we originally only signaled the selected attribute using blue font and a thicker axis line, but in response to MVP feedback stating confusion about the links between the two panels, we added a gray background to the selected attribute and increased its font weight. We also added hover interactions to each attribute label (having a lighter gray background appear and changing the cursor) to better imply that users could click on them to change the right panel. For the MVP, we included a tooltip to show an attribute definition under the radial chart whenever a viewer hovered over an attribute label. However, some users did not see the tooltip, and others reported trouble remembering or understanding the definitions. To remedy these concerns, we took three steps: (1) we added attribute definitions permanently to the introduction at the top of the page; (2) we put short reminders of each definition permanently under each axis label on the radial chart; and (3) we put the full Spotify definition of each attribute label under the frequency distribution title in the right panel to give users more detailed information about the selected attribute shown. 

The feature where clicking on the polygon shape triggers highlights on the area chart as well as rendering of the scatter plot is a one added after the MVP presentation. It is firstly done to address the feedback that the clickable shapes on the right side were not obvious. So we thought clicks on the left side polygon shape triggering highlights on the corresponding marks on the right side panel is a nice way  to introduce the audience to the further details available on the right. It also has the additional benefit of directly connecting the left-side and right-side visualizations via interactions, further tying in these graphs. 

For the density plot, the goal was to highlight how different songs within a genre may vary for each attribute in a visually simple manner. A smooth density plot was chosen to show the distribution over a histogram for its aesthetic appeal, and we were careful to give each plot a semi-transparent fill so that even with overlap different data would be easy to see and compare. Originally, we had only used a line, but in order to avoid the connotations that line plots have with time, we instead shifted to just using the fill. To keep the visualization simple but interconnected, we combined the axis labels with that of the scatter plot so that both share an x-axis. The specific genres visualized on the density plot varied based on the genres selected in other parts of the visualization to further tie together all of the distinct parts and the attribute being measured also changes based on the one selected from the web plot. When you select a density fill, you can further explore the data on a song by song basis in the scatterplot. When this happens, the density plot’s fill gets slightly darker to indicate to the viewer that it is currently selected and that there has been a change in setting. 

The scatter is introduced to allow users to inspect the details of the raw data. It serves to support the average on the spider web chart as well the distribution graphed on the area chart. Additionally it sends a signal of transparency as well as being a nice interface from which individual audio records can be introduced.

To give users a visual cue that they can interact with the scatterplot, we added a hover interaction to the points representing tracks. Upon mousing over a point, the dot grows in size and gains a small gray border (and both changes are undone upon mousing out). This implies to viewers that the points are interactive and encourages clicking (as mentioned in the introduction on our visualization page). 

When a point on the scatterplot is selected, it opens up the Spotify music player widget. This feature was a later addition, included to give viewers the opportunity to explore different genres and attributes auditorily. Given that this is a visualization about music, it only makes sense that the sense of hearing should be appealed to as well. This is especially useful for gaining an idea of what different genres typically sound like, and then hearing comparisons of what different levels of each attribute sound like. It can be difficult at times to explain what attributes like “danceability” mean but when you hear it, it can become clear. This part is the deepest layer of our visualization because it’s also the most fine grain level of data, and we don’t want to overwhelm viewers. However, being able to experience what is being visualized was too powerful of an opportunity to pass up. 

# Division of Work and Development Process
We split our work based on features. For example, during the initial development of the prototype, one was responsible for the radial graph,  one was for the area graph and one was responsible for the scatter plot. As we iterated on our visualization we each took on polishing and hooking up accordingly.

The part that took the most amount of time was making sure the clicking interaction works throughout the whole interaction as well as the debugging that comes with it. The nature of our visualization demands that a single click event triggers multiple updates across graphs, which leaves room for bugs and edge cases.  Thoroughly testing the visualization and fixing all the bugs took a particularly long time.

Seara was responsible for building the tab region, creating the scatter plot and connecting click interactions throughout the visualization dashboard. She was also heavily involved in polishing the MVP and final visualization, and spent roughly 15 hours in total working on the assignment. Margaret focused on the data generation from the API, the distribution plot, the Spotify music widget, and the blurb/writeup. This ended up taking roughly 16 hours. Julia was responsible for creating the radial chart, and she contributed to connecting click interactions related to the radial chart. She also contributed to polishing details on the visualization that highlight clickable areas (e.g. hover interactions). Julia spent about 15 hours working on this assignment. 
